An Inquiry into the Facts and Fiction of Freemasonry
Brandon A. Himes

Abstract
By writing this paper I aim to educate and inform the masses, and hopefully clear up any misunderstandings the public has on the topic of Freemasonry. I will discuss how the historical origins of Freemasonry and its beliefs have been misinterpreted, and in some cases lied about, by the Church, media, and some individuals. After explaining how and why these sources misled the public on Freemasonry, I will compare the alleged doings of Freemasonry compared to the reality of the matter. I will discuss how this misinformation changed the public’s opinion on Freemasonry as a whole and all who practice it, and how that impression still stands today. I will also diverge on the topic of famous Masons, as well as their contributions to society, along with conspiracy theories tied to them. Finally, I will discuss what direction Masonry will go in the future. I hope that this paper gathered from a variety of different sources (including real Masonic memorabilia) will inform and clear up any faulty superstition one may have on Freemasonry, and how one can still have an opinion, but have an educated one.

Keywords: Freemasonry, Mason, fraternity, organization, secret society, cult


When the term “Freemason” is dropped, it is quite common to think of shady people congregating in dark rooms, speaking of long-lost knowledge; the whole ordeal shrouded in a cloak of secrecy, unobservable to the commoner, but blatantly obvious to the informed. This presumption has stayed with society since nearly the dawn of the Freemasons, and still stands as the prevailing view towards Freemasonry today. However, one may find that Freemasonry is not quite as hyped-up as it is alleged to be. Of course, some may say that what you see is simply a cover up for a darker purpose, but that will be discussed later. Firstly, to understand Freemasonry, one must understand its origins. Freemasonry is the world’s oldest fraternal organization, originating sometime in the 17th century, but some Masonic documents trace the ideas of masonry and geometry to ancient Egypt, and some have suggested that Freemasonry originated there. In Scotland and England guilds for stonemasons and cathedral-builders can be found all the way back into the Middle Ages. Evidence of Masonic lodges has been found in the mid-17th century and onward, but they were different than the Freemason lodges we see today. It is widely accepted that ‘modern’ Masonry started in the 18th century, around when the Grand Lodge of England, which was the first Grand Lodge, was opened on June 24, 1717. After this lodge was opened, Masons no longer had to be actual stonemasons, and turned the simple tradesmen’s organizations into a fraternity that focused on philosophy and self-improvement. A rival grand lodge, the Antient Grand Lodge of England, was founded in 1751, and the two lodges competed with one another for supremacy until they were united in 1813 to form the Unified Grand Lodge of Masons. Until then, Masonry gradually spread and more and more lodges were founded and annexed into the jurisdiction of either grand lodge, and by the 1730’s Masonry found its way to the British colonies in North America. A short-lived idea to form an all-encompassing ‘Grand of the United States’, with George Washington as its leader, was formed shortly after the American Revolution, but since the state Grand Lodges did not want to lose their control, the idea was shut down. Over the next 200 or so years Masonry spread all over the world and became a huge fraternal organization, with approximately six million members around the world.

Freemasonry is essentially a brotherhood of religious men who seek the knowledge for self-improvement, and to help others. Freemasonry has various forms all over the world, but the central goal is still the same: friendship, brotherly love, philanthropy, and good morals. Many people today have the idea that it is a great ordeal to join the Freemasons, and that one must go through a lot of ritualistic and occult hoops to get in. That, however, is almost exactly the opposite. In fact, any adult male who believes in a Supreme Being (such as God, Allah, Jesus, Buddha, Yahweh, Vishnu) can simply go to their local Masonic lodge (which are not hidden in the slightest, their locations and meeting times can easily be found in publications and on their websites), and ask to join. The man is then investigated by the members of the lodge and a secret ballot is held, where the members vote on whether to admit him or not. Each Grand Lodge’s jurisdiction is different regarding how many votes it takes to accept a new member, some require it to be unanimous, while others will decline a man if 3 members vote against him joining. Many people also believe that Freemasonry is a religion, when it is explicitly stated that it is not. Since Freemasonry accepts men of all religions, and uses terms in the rituals like Volume of the Sacred Law and Great Architect of the Universe to refer to any holy book and any Supreme Being, respectively. Masonic rituals use many metaphorical and symbolic terms that relate with stonework and masonry to moral and ethical lessons, as well as key Masonic principles.

Many factors contributed to the idea of Freemasonry being such a secret society, but none being more infamous and influential as Leo Taxil’s hoax which claimed that Masonry was actually a world-wide organization of devil-worshipping conspirators. The hoax centers on Albert Pike, a 19th century Mason who was the Grand Commander of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite for the Southern Jurisdiction (The Scottish Rite is an appendant body of Freemasonry, meaning that it is an extension of Blue Craft Freemasonry, which is the foundation of Freemasonry). Pike is considered by many Masons as a genius, but the majority of anti-Masons consider him to be a Satanist. Pike wrote the book Morals and Dogma which is a philosophical book that is still available today and quite common in Masonic libraries around the world. The book has often been misquoted to give it a sinister tone, as was the case in Taxil’s hoax. Leo Taxil was a freethinker and writer who opposed societal authority, especially that to do with religion. Taxil wrote pornographic stories for a living, and also wrote anti-Catholic works. Taxil wanted to join a Masonic lodge, but was met with opposition from its members, primarily because of his reputation as an anti-Catholic writer, and the idea that Masons are tolerant of all religions. Despite opposition, Taxil was made a member for a short time, before he was expelled from the order. After this event, it is presumed, is when Taxil began writing anti-Mason propaganda. Taxil created a false document supposedly taken from Pike’s Morals and Dogma that states that Freemasonry is all about worshipping Satan. Taxil also wrote about a secret “inner circle” of Masons known as the Palladian Order, who were the secret masters of Freemasonry, and were the main Devil-worshippers. This “Palladian Order” did not exist and was created by Taxil to further his hoax. The hoax went on for over a decade before Taxil finally admitted he had made it all up, along with his other hoaxes, including telling the commandant of Marseilles that the harbor was infested with sharks and that a ship had been sent to destroy them, and inventing an underwater city in Lake Geneva to draw tourists and archaeology to the spot, and finally, what he considered his crowning hoax, his revelation of the fanatic anti-Mason beliefs of the Catholic Church by pinning “Devil-worship’” on the Freemasons. Anti-Mason beliefs can still be seen in Catholicism today, such as in the Catholic Encyclopedia Article on Freemasonry which reads, “Owing to the solidarity existing between all Masonic bodies and individual Masons, they are all jointly responsible for the evil doings of their fellow-members,” and “Freemasonry, far from contributing to the literary greatness of these or other leading men [referring to various anti-Masons].” One possible reason why the Catholic Church was so against Freemasonry would be that (according to the Catholic Encyclopedia) Albert Pike wrote to an Italian Mason asking him to unite the Masons against the Vatican saying, “The Papacy . . . has been for a thousand years the torturer and curse of Humanity, the most shameless imposture, in its pretence to spiritual power of all ages. With its robes wet and reeking with the blood of half a million of human beings, with the grateful odour of roasted human flesh always in its nostrils, it is exulting over the prospect of renewed dominion. It has sent all over the world its anathemas against Constitutional government and the right of men to freedom of thought and conscience.”

However, Taxil’s hoax was not the only reason Freemasons were regarded as Satanists, which is still a major belief of anti-Masons today. Albert Pike himself furthered this belief, although perhaps not willingly, in his book Morals and Dogma. On page 321, Pike writes “Lucifer, the Light-bearer! Strange and mysterious name to give to the Spirit of Darkness! Lucifer, the Son of the Morning! Is it he who bears the Light, and with its splendors intolerable, blinds feeble, sensual, or selfish souls? Doubt it not!" Pike also at one point refers to the “false Lucifer of the legend”. Few anti-Masons will not use this quote as proof that Freemasons worship Satan, since Morals and Dogma is supposedly the foundation for Freemasonry and so blatantly states that Lucifer is the true light-bearer. Add to that the supported claim that Pike was high up in the Ku Klux Klan, and you seem to have perfect evidence of a satanic conspiracy. However, Morals and Dogma, is not, in the slightest, a set of rules or basis for Freemasonry, and barely any Masons have even heard of Pike, let alone seen or read his work. In fact, more anti-Masons have read Morals and Dogma than Masons. The idea that started the belief that this book was the “Bible” of Freemasonry started with the fact that it was found in many Masons’ libraries. This was because the Southern Jurisdiction of the Scottish Rite gave the book as a gift to all new members for a period of 60 years or so, simply out of respect for Pike, who did so much for their organization. The end result is that Morals and Dogma is merely a philosophical work; the ideas of one man. Pike’s book was simply his attempt at providing the framework for understanding the philosophies and religions of the past. It was Pike’s belief that you could never fully understand a concept unless you knew the history of that concept. Morals and Dogma was not meant for any Masonic group, jurisdiction, or lodge; it held no power over any Mason, and is not a set of principles set forth for Masons to follow. Evidence of this can be seen in the book’s preface, which, unsurprisingly, is not quoted by anti-Masons: “Everyone is entirely free to reject and dissent from whatsoever herein may seem to him to be untrue or unsound. It is only required of him that he shall weigh what is taught, and give it fair hearing and unprejudiced judgment.” This quote supports the earlier belief of Pike’s that you could not fully understand a concept without understanding its history. Pike is simply saying to form an educated opinion instead of rushing to conclusions. Pike also writes on page 161 that "Masonry is not a religion. He who makes of it a religious belief, falsifies and denaturalizes it." This further supports that Masonry is not Satanic, and that it is not religious in any way. As for the aforementioned quote about Lucifer, a little more background information must be given.

Lucifer’s first and only appearance in the Old Testament appears in the Book of Isaiah, in the fourteenth chapter, at the twelfth verse: “How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! How art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations!” The interesting thing about this verse is that ‘Lucifer’ is a Latin name, so how did it find its way into a Hebrew text that was written before there was even a Latin language? This exact question was asked by the author John J. Robinson, so he asked a Hebrew scholar at the library of the Hebrew Union College in Cincinnati. The answer he received would surprise nearly all Christians. The fact is that this verse of the Bible does not reference Satan at all, but rather a ‘fallen’ Babylonian king who persecuted the children of Israel. In actuality, the entire Old Testament has no reference to a fallen angel. The term Lucifer comes from Roman astronomy, and was given to the morning star, which is also known by the Roman name Venus which is sometimes considered another name for Satan. The morning star appears in the sky just before dawn, and the name ‘Lucifer’ is derived from the Latin term lucem ferre which means “bringer/bearer of light”. In the original Hebrew texts, the term used to describe the Babylonian king was "Helal, son of Shahar" which translates to “Day Star, son of the Dawn”. This term is said to reference the glitter of a king’s dress and court, similar to, as Robinson writes, “[how] his personal splendor earned for King Louis XIV of France the appellation, "The Sun King". “ This now makes the twelfth verse in the fourteenth chapter of Isaiah read as “How art thou fallen from heaven, O bright morning star…” Robinson writes that this is most likely the basis for Pike’s and other Masonic scholars references to Lucifer, they were referring to the light, rather than satanic evil.

Satanic conspiracy is not the only label applied to Freemasons, but one among countless, such as Freemasonry being tied to theories of a ‘New World Order’. These accusations are based merely on speculation due to the number of famous Masons, including Simon Bolivar, Davy Crockett, George Washington, Benjamin Franklin, George Washington, Theodore Roosevelt, Franklin D, Roosevelt, Phil Collins, Enrico Fermi, Gerald Ford, James Garfield, King George IV, King George VI, Harry Houdini, J. Edgar Hoover, Andrew Jackson, Andrew Johnson, Lyndon B. Johnson, Rudyard Kipling, Franz Liszt, General Douglas MacArthur, Harpo Marx, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and his father, Leopold, Brad Paisley, General George Patton, Paul Revere, all seven Ringling Brothers, William Howard Taft, Harry S. Truman, Mark Twain, and Oscar Wilde, among countless other politicians and rulers. From the sheer number of U.S. Presidents, it can be seen how many would believe Freemasonry to be in control of politics, but there is no tangible evidence to support this idea. Another thought contributing to the idea of Freemasonry being in control of politics, or that America has a secret, sinister purpose, is the seal on the back of the U.S. dollar. Both Masons and conspiracy-theorists alike have both claimed that the seal bears Masonic roots, the former with pride, and the latter with fear. However, neither of these assertions is correct. The seal is derived from Renaissance art and represented an 'omniscient Ubiquitous Deity'. This artistic symbol was the reason the Masons eventually adopted it as one of their symbols in 1797; 14 years after Congress accepted the design as the U.S. seal. Anti-Masons also like to point to infamous Masons and claim that all of Freemasonry is like that. For example, when one hears that Aleister Crowley and Anders Breivik were both Masons, thoughts of Freemasonry being an evil organization are sure to arise. However, this is only if one ignores the Masons who have actually contributed something good to society, such as FDR, Mark Twain, Oscar Wilde, George Washington, Ben Franklin, and many, many others.

It seems that no matter how many theories are proven false, or how unreliable the theories are in the first place, that Masons will nearly always be not in good standing in the public’s eye. Even when Masons contribute consistently to society with their schools, sheltered housing, and medical assistance, many will look and only see them as devil-worshipping New World Order fanatics. Since Masons have faced discrimination for over 200 years and have managed to stay prominent, it is unlikely that they will fade into obscurity. Currently, with their six million members spread all over the world in thousands of lodges, along with the thousands of Masonic philanthropic organizations such as The Masonic Service Association, the Masonic Medical Research Laboratory, and the Shriners Hospitals for Children, among many others, it can nearly be guaranteed that Freemasonry will continue to exist long into the future, and will continue to give despite facing distrust and contempt from the public.

After delving into the basis of Freemasonry and the conspiracy theories against them, along with arguments to dispute those theories, I hope that this paper has enlightened, or at least, educated readers and helped them form an educated opinion on the topic of Freemasonry, and its supposed ‘evilness’. The point of this paper is not to completely dismiss the accusations towards Freemasonry, nor is it meant to condone all of Freemasonry’s principles and people, its purpose is merely to inform the reader of both sides of the story, as to allow for them to create a formed, educated opinion on this topic that so influences our idea of modern occultism.


References
Dafoe, S. (2010). The Baphomet and the Freemasons. In Templar History: A History and Mythos of the Knights Templar. Retrieved March 10, 2012, from http://blog.templarhistory.com/2010/04/the-baphomet-and-the-freemasons

Freemasonry. (n. d.). In All About Cults. Retrieved March 9, 2012, from http://allaboutcults.org/freemasonry.htm

Freemasonry. (n. d.). In Wikipedia: The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved March 8, 2012, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freemasonry

Frequently Asked Questions. (2011). In Ask a Freemason. Retrieved March 9, 2012, from http://askafreemason.org/topten/index.htm

Greer, J. M. (2006). The Element Encyclopedia of Secret Societies and Hidden History. New York, NY: Barnes & Noble Publishing, Inc.

Gruber, H. (1910). Masonry (Freemasonry). In The Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. Retrieved March 11, 2012 from New Advent: http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/09771a.htm

Keohane, S. (n. d.). Christians Beware of Freemasonry. In Bible Probe. Retrieved March 9, 2012, from http://www.bibleprobe.com/freemasonry.htm

King, E. L. (n. d.). Lucifer. In Anti-Masonry Points of View. Retrieved March 10, 2012, from http://www.masonicinfo.com/lucifer.htm

King, E. L. (n. d.). Norway Killer. In Anti-Masonry Points of View. Retrieved March 10, 2012, from http://www.masonicinfo.com/norwaykiller.htm

King, E. L. (n. d.). Albert Pike. In Anti-Masonry Points of View. Retrieved March 10, 2012, from http://www.masonicinfo.com/pike.htm

Léo Taxil. (n. d.). In Wikipedia: The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved March 9, 2012, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leo_Taxil

List of Freemasons. (n. d.). In Wikipedia: The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved March 10, 2012, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Freemasons

Masonry Proven Conclusively to be worship of Lucifer, Satan! Part 1 of 2. (n. d.). In Cutting Edge Ministries. Retrieved March 10, 2012, from http://www.cuttingedge.org/free11.html

Morris, S. (n. d.). The Eye in the Pyramid. In A Page About Freemasonry. Retrieved March 10, 2012, from http://web.mit.edu/dryfoo/www/Masonry/Essays/eyepyr.html

Pike, A. (n. d.). Morals and Dogma. Retrieved from http://www.sacred-texts.com/mas/md/index.htm

Taxil Hoax. (n. d.). In Wikipedia: The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved March 9, 2012, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taxil_hoax